What I was just going to say is that I'm not a collector at all, but love living with this collection.
It's a great pleasure, and have always had a bargain with them, particularly when we were in the other apartment, which was just inundated with books, because this is just a small portion of his book collection.
And we had, I think, 60,000 to 70,000 books in the other apartment, so I just said, as long as we kept my side of the bed clear, that was okay, because there literally were piles of books everywhere.
I mean, they took on...
human dimensions or living dimensions, and that was quite something.
Now, you're a therapist, I understand.
Do you have an evaluation of this phenomenon?
And I'm not asking for a really serious evaluation.
Nothing in particular.
I mean, I think that he just has such an eye.
I have a couple of thoughts.
I mean, I think he has an extraordinary eye and loves interesting, quirky, beautiful
and loves putting things together.
And I think he's been that way since he was a kid, to see that with the soldiers.
And, you know, it has at times gotten out of hand, which the book collection did, because there's no way, once you decide that you're going to collect 20th century fiction and go for every author, you know, he kept, he would say, I'm not going to collect that author.
And then he'd read a good review by a new author and a first nominee and say, well, I've got to add that one.
So I think that got out of hand, and it was a blessing to have moved, because by this apartment smaller, and we were limited because of that.
Did you influence that in any kind of subtle way, would you say?
The move?
Yeah.
Oh, major way.
I really wanted to move.
I also wanted to be near the park.
I see.
So it wasn't really a way of cutting down on the collecting in any way.
That wasn't in mine, but I mean, that really wasn't.
It's a happy concept.
We knew there was no way, you know, we were going to move.
We wanted something smaller.
That was an apartment with seven bedrooms.
And we knew that we wanted something much smaller.
And we also had always wanted a living room that was a library.
And so we could live with the books.
We didn't have, the books were, you know, in every hallway and in the kitchen.
Paul.
Did he know where everything was?
He knows where everything is.
He has always known where everything is.
If you came in and moved anything, he would be able to say, my God, what happened to this such and such?
He knows where everything is.
My wife loaned a book of short stories, she was straight to her mother.
And then no problem.
But I said, have you seen my, you know, of course, I don't believe it.
It was.
Because I'm double-shelved.
I have books in front of them back.
Yeah, so are a lot of these.
How did you know it was wrong?
There's a great quote I use in the book, in my book.
Somebody asked Charles Lamb, you know, how can he possibly know what he has?
And he says, how does a shepherd know his sheep?
That's wonderful.
I mean, he was very anxious about making a move.
He had been in that apartment for 24 years, 23 years, and I was there for 19 years.
Much longer time than any of us have ever lived.
either of us have ever moved any place, and he was, he, I don't think he would have moved had I not really wanted to move, and had, you know, he, he was very anxious about it, and because it seemed so daunting, how do you move 70,000 books, and how do you, you know, begin to, Now, did he supervise this?
Clearly, he must have had people.
He has always, the book collection, and I don't know if you know this, but it was, he did it all, it was not, he resisted computer, computerizing it for years, so he did it, yeah, now it is, but,
So he did it all on yellow pads to begin with, and then finally had a notebook where he did all the cataloging.
He now had someone, you know, who works on... Have you met Richard?
No.
Somebody who works on the collection, but for the first couple of years, he did it all.
And, you know, it was painstaking and timely.
But moving... No, there was a huge crew to move...
Is it pretty much Catala?
I'll have to ask him that.
It's alphabetical.
Oh, it is alphabetical.
There's some bound books on the top that have nothing to do with the collection on the top of the shelf, but it starts with Agee, and it goes around the room.
Oh, so it's pretty systematic.
Oh, yeah, and then it's finished.
I think it goes to...
uh okay yeah soon um you must have you do a wealthy here so then well no that goes into the living there's another library so the rest of tea through um now he said these boxes made everywhere yeah those have all been made and he does all you know he would sit for hours on end with the glycine or whatever glassine or whatever it's called and do all the coverings himself one two three four five six seven eight nine ten ten ten
yeah yeah so he he knows where everything is he knows um what everything is we don't read these books i mean for you to you're what if i had given a you know book of cheaper short stories to um somebody he would have had a fit yeah he doesn't we don't really read them but we'll what we'll do is there'll be people here talking and we'll have the kids here and
talking about Sylvia Plath or something, and then he'll pull things out and we'll read the letters.
He'll read the letters?
No, we all will.
He's not protective like that, but he doesn't want them read, you know, just sitting with dog-eared and etc.
So he's careful about that, but loves that people are interested.
And there's so few people who really are.
I've found this everywhere I go.
It's such a phenomenal thing, so unless you
And he was thrilled with that when someone really understands what he's done.
I've got Mark.
Me, Catherine, went out to put in school with the book collection growing like crazy.
His room was covered with bookcases.
So he came home to find his room.
intact, but with, you know, thousands of books.
He was 15, this is young Carter.
He was 15, and to this day is offended by that.
And I was offended by that.
Carter was really stubborn about that one, because he wanted that space, and I thought that was awful.
But that's the, it's never, other than that, it's never bothered me very much.
Also, the other thing, when the collection was growing at its fastest,
there was one room sort of the receiving room where they would come and we would sometimes come back for a weekend and that room would be filled with 60 cartons that he had to open and you know how books get those little silver well i don't know where she said i don't know okay okay i'm just gonna look okay as you can see it starts alphabetically um
in the river house, I had it served by categories, but I'm rather pleased that it is health medical.
So starting with A, working the way we get to back to part of S here, and then a complete.
Actually, you have a wrap over there, too, I noticed.
Right.
Hi, Mark.
How are you?
Good.
You are?
How are you?
Hey.
This is wonderful coming here.
And books are everywhere, right?
I assume they are.
And then it starts again, but it has to continue, and then all the way around ends up over there.
I think you said the last time there were about 15,000 books here.
And so, therefore, the remainder is in storage?
Yeah, I am not sure whether it really is 15,000.
We just...
I'm working on an inventory to catalog them somewhat more efficiently.
I think it's more like 12, probably.
So there are perhaps 30 or 45,000 elsewhere.
Yeah, there are.
So is this the cream of the collection?
This is the cream of the collection.
These are the people that I want to continue with and add to and so forth.
Timothy Williams Street kind of desire.
It's a gorgeous rapper.
I'm sorry.
And some of the secondary titles, say, for Williams and so forth, I have to keep in storage.
Now, when you say storage, are they accessible to you?
Yeah, they're accessible.
They are accessible.
I mean, it's not like they're in trunks that you can't... No, they're accessible.
It's very expensive, however.
I've got to try and find a better way to do it.
Are you comfortable with the reduced number?
Oh, yeah.
You were, at one point, working on approximately 6,000 office.
What would you say the number is now?
Should it come down that way?
What, roughly, I mean, isn't that good?
500, maybe?
Really?
No, I don't think it comes, no.
Boy, does that mean, have you deaccessioned, shall we say, the other 5,500?
Well, I'm trying to figure out what to do with them.
You still have them.
Yeah, I still have them.
But they are no longer being actively collected.
Right, right, exactly.
Peter Howard, when I interviewed him, suggested that your premise, which was bold and wonderful.
Very lucrative.
I put a quote on it.
Where was I?
He said that he thought your premise was to pick up where Barrett,
left off to try and do the same thing right and that's pretty interesting and i've since researched barrett pretty thoroughly you've obviously know more than i do yeah i'll send you some stuff when it was fascinating yeah virginia sent me a wonderful he really was um i mean comprehensive wasn't it i mean well kind of what you're doing i mean they really are it's right i don't know the story about him buying a
whole duplicate Frost collection just to get the first book, right?
Yeah, well, you bought Hike and the Airplane to get the DJ.
Right.
That didn't blow me off the line.
You have two Ann Tyler first books there.
You know, they're probably all variants, or they're both inscribed or whatever.
Let me go talk to Mark.
Okay.
Father Fly died, you know.
Oh, yes.
His copy, so I've got a couple of books.
Oh, that's nice.
Yeah, which is very nice.
So you're still collecting.
Oh, yeah.
I bought something from Peter's podcast.
Oh, I interviewed Carl Peterson.
Mm-hmm.
He's in my book.
Actually, everything is just about written.
It's very close.
It's getting very close.
Oh, that's right.
What was I going to ask you?
I think it's got a million questions.
I really won't be here long.
I really wanted to come.
Oh, I wanted to see.
Is it basically these two roles?
That's it, yeah.
All right.
Quick question, and you don't have to answer it if you don't want to, but Peter had mentioned to me, and somebody else had mentioned that when Margie Cohn had more or less introduced you to the book world,
and she showed you around.
Did you know that she put like a 10% commission on the internet?
I learned that.
I learned that after about six months to my horror, and I stopped.
I never went back to her.
Yeah.
One guy told me, and I won't tell you his name, but I looked at my transcript, and Peter absolutely said it.
Apparently, she took you around on her arm, and she basically said,
No question about it.
This is mine, and it's 10%.
And people, this one guy, said that we were required to give her 10%.
And I just wondered if, I don't know what it is.
It's actually true.
I'd like to report it, actually.
I'm all for it.
You can quote me.
Do you mind?
Not at all, because I'm still pissed off about it, frankly.
and um when i confronted her about it oh well that's the way goodwin i did it with you know goodwin who's goodwin uh remember the goodwin sale and it was about 77 here in america well carl peterson you know swore by her yeah good for you i didn't think that you'd want me to report that i've been
looking for somebody to make that point.
Well, I'm trying to do more than just a little superficial recording about the beautiful books.
I'm trying to give somebody the dynamic of the book trade.
And now Peter did also say, I don't know if you've ever heard the phrase before, and he spoke rapturously about the Carter-Burden phenomenon.
Have you ever heard that phrase?
No.
So that's new to you.
That's new to me.
Well, you can read about it in my book, and I won't have to ask you about it.
But he basically said that you energized
I guess I could ask you this.
Do you feel that you in any way brought modern first editions up to a higher level than perhaps it had been prior to that?
Because you really could have collected anything else.
Well, I think it's just an indication of how unpopular the field is, frankly.
I mean, this is a period when people, you know,
Well, our popular fine arts were going up in value enormously and so forth, and huge amounts of money were being spent.
And I think, you know, books here go void as a kind of speculative fever.
It was possible.
Although you look at Manny was an ample of... I should have brought the Manny stuff up.
It really goes down to bankruptcy.
Really?
Yeah.
Let's say Bradley Martin sold for $39 million.
If that had gone to the heirs, what would they have had to pay for taxes?
$35 million.
60% of the, let's say, $40 million.
So the figure is 60%.
60%, absolutely.
Because we were talking about that, why it's impossible to... They would have had to come up.
Now, probably for estate purposes, they would have valued it at less than $39 million, I would imagine.
$35, I think, is what they got.
Yeah, just 60%.
They'd have to come up with 60% in cash to keep it.
That's a lot of money.
regardless of how much that you might have.
Exactly.
And so we figured Scheide's library is worth anywhere from 50 to 100 million dollars.
He's got two Gutenberg Bibles now.
And, you know, he brought... Terrific.
That's really nice.
I guess the only person he really stopped was Houghton, for whatever reason.
He's still alive, right?
No, he died.
Did he die?
Yeah, he died.
In fact, you know who knew him very well?
Who?
I talked to him as James Michener.
Oh.
Jim Michener gave me some very good insights about it.
The feeling was with Houghton.
Did I have anything else I wanted to ask you?
What's your favorite thing?
Can you show me a favorite thing?
A favorite thing.
Okay.
Hold on.
Favorite thing.
Do you mean a book?
Something.
Why don't I show you these?
Probably more historical.
Are you happy here?
Right across from the Met?
I didn't realize it until I got here.
It's so nice to have everything, you know, to be able to get it, say anything.
And by the way, I'm just going to say Upper West Side.
Yeah, okay.
That would be great.
No different from what they did in the Vogue piece.
And you don't mind if I report in my book that that Vogue spread was this place?
No, go ahead.
Absolutely.
These are...
These are a collection of about 120 letters.
Ralph had them?
Ralph had them, yeah.
So these are really, those are hers, but then should we have these treated?
I probably should, no.
It certainly does.
But they're all very chatty.
I mean, it's extraordinary for a writer that nobody knows anything about.
You can, one, trace his, where he was.
They're all very chatty.
They're all about what he was doing, their responses.
That's great.
Isn't that great?
Yeah, that's great.
Yeah.
One doesn't want to ask why the agent sold them, I suppose.
He dropped her.
Yeah.
I see you can't publish these though, right?
No, no, no.
Do you have the Ian Hamilton proof?
Yeah, I do.
I do.
Can I ask, just curious what you pay for that?
Oh, nothing.
I bought it for, I don't know, $35 because I bought it early.
Wow.
What is it worth?
Oh, big.
I couldn't say, $500 maybe?
Yeah.
It has to be.
Well, because the book was censored at the end of the book.
This is to his elder at the New Yorker, Gus Lebrano.
Why don't you tell me what we've got here.
He was the only known first, the first English, with a, with, you know, a,
inscription of this length to his editor.
We won't read it, but it's dated July 1851.
And it says, Dear Gus, and it's signed... Jerry.
Dear Gus, this is the first catcher in the rye I've ever inscribed.
It couldn't possibly go to anyone but you.
That isn't even nearly all I want to say.
Your advice counted so much while I was writing the book.
It should go without saying, but I'll say it anyway, that I'd rather have your approval of my work than anybody else's.
I wish everybody knew what an artist you are.
One last thing, if you can bear it.
If I were Holden's brother, I would write across the flyleaf of his address book, Please Call Gus Lebrano.
with worlds of affection, Jerry.
L-O, L-O, or L-A?
L-O, maybe.
L-O-B-R-A-N-O.
He was a famous editor of New York.
Now, I can assure you, I won't quote that.
Yeah.
Because I'd have trouble from selling it.
You would, right?
That's right.
What I'm going to say is, what is apparently the first inscribed book?
As long as you don't quote it.
Yeah.
Is that what it means?
Even an inscription in a book?
Yeah.
The copyright's here?
Oh, that was what the case was all about.
Oh, my God.
That's what that whole case was about.
Let me just check my notes here.
What other thing?
You saw that biography by, what's his name, about the Paley's, not the Paley's, the sisters.
Oh, yeah.
And did you read it?
I didn't really read it.
And they said when you were in politics,
I'm just wondering if Grafton's getting a little hyperbolic, that the White House was just around the corner.
Please, I mean, I was in city council for a second.
Did you ever have any, I mean, did you ever, honestly, ever have any aspirations to it?
No.
So that's foolish.
Yeah, that's foolish.
So it would be foolish of me to repeat that quote.
Yes, I hope so.
I'm just trying to be, you know.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, it's absurd, you know.
That was press.
It seems, I said, how could they possibly...
Yeah, I was running for the city council of New York, for God's sake.
Okay.
What's your Updike collection up to now with all those things?
Oh, God.
The sign limited.
You and I had a discussion about that.
Yeah.
And I think that you admitted that if you had it to do all over again, you'd never get into that stuff.
Maybe not.
I don't know.
Yeah, except Updike is so good.
I mean, I admire him so much.
Updike is the exception.
Uptake's an exception.
More than 500?
Oh, yeah.
Do you have everything, do you think?
I don't even know what I've got.
Everything.
There's a guy out in Western Mass.
I mean, things keep turning up.
Okay.